	I see this world with a different lens. Within my field of view, clusters of semi-translucent strings float and sway with my eye movement. Under bright light, these bouncing specks remind me of constellations in the night sky. For 16 years of my life, I thought everyone’s vision was marred like mine. This was until my first eye check-up in the US where an ophthalmologist imaged my eyes with an optical coherence tomography (OCT) machine. These “floaters,” as they are called, were caused by degenerated vitreous body and could indicate serious underlying illnesses. Thankfully, excluding the floaters, I had no other symptoms to confirm any diagnosis. However, knowing that a compact machine could provide such insight exemplified the impact of bioengineering and motivated me to pursue this major.
	Although I spent the majority of college exploring different fields like protein diagnostics, biotherapeutics, and rehabilitation, the imaging courses I took in the past two quarters have reshaped my interest. In my imaging fundamentals class last quarter, I learned that CT scans generate cross-sectional images using fourier transform, a theory I had learned before. I did not recognize the value of this theory when I first learned it. 
The direct application of this mathematical technique demonstrated an engineering feat with health implications. Since then, I realized my passion for this field because of its roots in math, engineering, and medicine. At the end of the class, an in-depth comparison across common imaging modalities illustrated the limitations with each of them. Indeed, there remain needs within this field that require more work.
        One need, in particular, is to minimize radiation dosage. Besides ultrasound that uses non-invasive sound waves, OCT also requires no radioactive contrast when generating images. I decided to take an OCT class to further my knowledge. When learning the theory behind fourier domain OCT, I again felt drawn to this field of imaging, even more strongly than the first time. Through engineering ingenuity, it is amazing that the collection rate of an OCT system increased from 400 Hz to 200 kHz within the past decade. With this improvement, current OCT systems support wider field of view and enables physicians to see more deeply into the tissue and access dynamic information useful for diagnosis.
        I am applying to the Biomedical master’s program at Tufts because of its strong research in the field of imaging. Dr. Sergio Fatini’s work in developing optical instrumentation and assessing cerebral hemodynamics is in the forefront of OCT. Considering the increasing popularity of smartwatches and their optically derived heart rate monitors, Dr. Fatini’s effort can unveil the latent potentials of this technology to facilitate collection of other biometric data. Similarly, Dr. Eric Miller’s endeavor in image reconstruction algorithms that maximize contrast are equally prominent and exciting.
        Having a multidisciplinary background especially in the fields of electrical engineering and signal processing, I envision myself to give unique insight when tackling problems.