	I see this world with a different lens. Within my field of view, clusters of semi-translucent strings bounce around like constellations in the night sky. For 16 years, I thought everyone’s vision was marred like mine. This all changed after my first eye check-up in the US.  An ophthalmologist imaged my eyes with an optical coherence tomography (OCT) machine. I then learned that these “floaters” were caused by degenerated vitreous body and could indicate serious underlying illnesses. I was shocked to hear this. Thankfully, excluding the floaters, I had no other symptoms to confirm any diagnosis. However, knowing that a compact machine could provide such insight exemplified the impact of bioengineering and motivated me to pursue this major.
	In college, I explored areas including protein diagnostics, biotherapeutics, and rehabilitation. I recognized their impact on human lives, but the imaging courses I took in the past two quarters have reshaped my interest. The field of imaging spans many subjects. Using math and physics principles, imaging modalities enable us to literally see through a solid object. An example of this lies in the central slicing theorem of CT and PET scans. After scanning an injured patient with a donut-shaped gantry, the imaging system applies fourier transform to locate his/her organs with great precision. Without inflicting any harm to the patient besides the radioactive contrast agent, the physician can then examine each organ and diagnose with confidence. This is the appeal of imaging. As an engineer in this field, I apply pure theories to address dire needs. I turn complex numbers into clinical insight.
	After realizing my passion in this field, I took a course on OCT to further my imaging knowledge. In spite of the success of modern imaging modalities, the need to minimize radiation dosage remains. OCT is a promising alternative. Requiring no radioactive contrast, OCT generates images with light and achieve micron-scale resolution. When learning the theory behind fourier domain OCT, I again felt drawn to this field of imaging. Through engineering ingenuity, the collection rate of an OCT system increased from 400 Hz to 200 kHz within the past decade. With this improvement, current OCT systems support wider field of view and enables physicians to see more deeply into the tissue and access dynamic information useful for diagnosis.
	I am applying to the Biomedical master’s program at Tufts because of its strong research in the field of imaging. Dr. Sergio Fatini’s work in developing optical instrumentation and assessing cerebral hemodynamics is in the forefront of OCT. Considering the increasing popularity of smartwatches and their optically derived heart rate monitors, Dr. Fatini’s effort can unveil the latent potentials of this technology to facilitate collection of other biometric data. Similarly, Dr. Eric Miller’s endeavor in image reconstruction algorithms that maximize contrast are equally prominent and exciting.
	Having a multidisciplinary background especially in the fields of electrical engineering and signal processing, I envision myself to give unique insight when tackling problems.